tonight I'm very
to welcome Jack Goldsmith to politics
and prose celebrating his newest work in
Hoffa shadow a stepfather a
disappearance in Detroit and my search
for the truth there have been many
theories about the fate of Jimmy Hoffa a
longtime president of the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters since he
disappeared in 75 many involved Charles
Chuckie O'Brien a hop is aid and
goldsmith stepfather in the compelling
account goldsmith recounts how his
childhood affection for O'Brien became
more complicated as he pursued a legal
career then when the perspective he
gained for serving as assistant attorney
general under george w bush goldsmith
was moved to uncover the truth about
le'Bryan Hoffa the mob the waning labor
Labor's power and the rise of the
surveillance state in Hoffa shadow tells
the moving story of how Goldsmith
reunited with the stepfather he disowned
and then set out to unravel one of the
20th century's most persistent mysteries
and Chucky's role in it Goldsmith is the
henriella shadek professor at Harvard
Law School a senior fellow at the Hoover
institutes headed the Office of Legal
Counsel
in the George W Bush administration
which during his tenure he challenged
the warrantless wiretapping program and
withdrew two memos written before his
tenure justifying the use of torture in
the war against terrorism
he is also authored Terror presidency as
well as power and constraint so please
join me in welcoming to politics and
prose Jack Goldsmith
[Applause]
thank you thank you very much to
politics and prose for hosting this
event thanks to you all for coming out
tonight even though there's serious
competition with the democratic debate
and a certain baseball team that I know
there many fans for I'm grateful that
you came so my tale begins in June of
1975 when I was 12 years old I was
living in West Memphis Arkansas and my
mother in June of 1975 married what was
her third husband his name was Charles
Chuckie O'Brien I did not have my birth
father was not a terribly good father
my stepfather the second marriage was
not a great father so I hadn't really
had a great father figure in my life by
the time I was 12 years old and Chuckie
O'Brien shows up on the scene and he
they got married in June of 75 and I had
known him for about six months before
then and I immediately glommed onto him
and he was an amazing father he showed
me the love and affection I'd never had
we did everything together
and I thought he was the greatest 12
years old six months after my mom
married him Jimmy Hoffa disappeared
mysteriously from a parking lot in in
the suburbs of Detroit Michigan in
Bloomfield Hills outside of a restaurant
that was then called the Makos Redd Foxx
to this day there's no direct evidence
of what happened to Hoffa he vanished
there are lots of theories but no one
knows what happens what happened he was
in the parking lot he was seen in the
parking lot this lady's 245 and the next
thing we know he had his last phone call
at 3:30 and that's it there are lots of
theories about how he was picked up but
we don't know to this day what happened
to Hoffman who is Jimmy Hoffa Jimmy
Hoffa as many people in the room may
know was in the 50s and 60s one of the
most well known public figures in the
country he led the Teamsters Union which
was the most powerful union in the
country at a time when unions mattered
he was had an outsized personality he
was an extraordinary labor leader for
the Teamsters and he was also corrupt in
many ways he had many ties to organized
crime
he cut side deals all the time
he used the pension fund to line his own
pockets but he was this huge large
figure and he basically went to jail in
1967 for a variety of things he was out
of jail and 71 when Richard Nixon
pardoned him or commuted his sentence I
should say and he was trying to regain
the presidency of the Teamsters when he
was disappear probably almost certainly
at the behest of the mob because
basically Hoffa was trying to win back
the Teamsters Union the presidency of
the Teamsters Union the mob had taken
over control of the Teamsters Union much
more than when he was president and they
didn't want him back they feared he was
going to spill all their secrets about
because he was threatening to do so and
there's pretty good evidence
circumstantial and otherwise that it was
mob organized there's a lot of evidence
of that but no evidence of what happened
that day one week after the
disappearance Chuckie O'Brien became the
lead suspects Chuckie O'Brien was also
hafez right-hand man from the early 50s
basically until he disappeared until the
year before he disappeared he met Hoffa
when he was nine years old and he was by
Hoffa side basically all the time from
the early 50s until he went to prison
and then after prison until just before
he disappeared many people thought that
Chucky was hafez illegitimate son
because they were so close and they were
just extremely close they were always
together and so it was quite an
extraordinary thing when six days after
the disappearance my stepfather
became the leading suspect now for those
of you who remember it was a circus
the Hoffa disappearance was a circus it
was front-page news every day it was on
the evening news every night for weeks
and it was just an incredible maelstrom
and I was in the middle of it because I
was this 12 year old kid who's that new
stepdad who he revered as the leading
suspect so during the next five years
during my high school years the
formative years of my life as I look
back on it Chucky was caught up and here
I was he didn't suspect to be to be
brief there was a lot of circumstantial
evidence that pointed towards him being
involved including that he was in the
vicinity at the time of the
disappearance he had had a break with
Hoffa six or eight months earlier he was
driving a car that was the car the son
of the leading Detroit mobster who was
thought to have organized the hit hafez
hair was a hair matching Hoffa was later
found in the car and half a cent was
found in the car so they were
circumstantial evidence pointing to it
towards him the FBI had every reason to
focus in on him so the next five years
of my life was basically there were two
or three things going on one Chucky and
I became like this I came to revere him
as I said he was an extraordinary father
I came to revere the Teamsters Union I
came to revere Teamsters Union his Union
identity
I came to revere the mobsters that he
was close with you may have heard of
Anthony Giacalone II and Anthony
provenzano Tony Pro a New Jersey mobster
those are both Uncle Tony to me I spent
a lot of time at their house I thought
they were wonderful gentlemen and I
believed my stepfather when I when he
told me that the mob really didn't exist
I mean I just kind of bought the whole
thing this is at the same time that I
was hanging out with these folks and
that he was my father and we were very
close to the Hoffa stuff was just out of
control and the government was all over
him and he was basically painted in the
press as the guy who did it and it's to
this day it's conventional wisdom that
Chucky was the person who drove Hoffa to
his death if you type in Chuckie O'Brien
and Jimmy Hoffa into Google you will
find that that's the person who who did
it who picked off up so I go to college
in 1980 and over the next six or seven
years I start to rethink Chucky when I
got to college I read books about the
Hoffa disappearance for the first time
one of which was Dan weld a his great
book the Hoffa war stands in the back
there and it turns out this may seem
naive but it turns out the Mafia did
actually exist it turned out that my
uncle Tony
my uncle's Tony were violent guys it
turned out my stepfather was had a
criminal past all things that I kind of
either was dimly aware of her didn't
focus on when I was in high school
also I came to worry that maybe my life
would be endangered from being from
hanging out with Jackie from being his
son
I came to when I used to revel in his
Union identity and I came to used to
revel in his making fun of education my
value started changing in college and I
came to admire and less and finally I
started thinking about my career my
professional career I was accepted at
Yale Law School and I started to think
maybe it won't be such a great thing to
be an attorney especially if I have any
ambitions to be in the government which
I only barely did to have these very
close mob ties and to be the foster son
or it's even a stepson of the leading
suspect on the Hoffa disappearance so to
make a very long story short I cut
Chuckie out of my life and it was a slow
process about five or six years a
gradual process and I concluded
basically by the time I finished in law
school that I needed to go on with my
life and have nothing to do with him I
had convinced myself at the time that he
was a bad person that I was a virtuous
person and needed to stay on a virtuous
path that he had either wrong to me or
might wronged me and I built all this up
in my mind and I basically cut him out
of my life and it was brutal and it hurt
him quite a lot in ways that I didn't
appreciate at the time and I'll come
back to at the end of this talk so it
turned out that this was a very good
idea from a professional standpoint the
year after I got out of law school I was
clerking for Jay Harvey wilkinson on the
fourth circuit and the first thing he
asked me to do was to work in the case
that required me to get classified
security clearance secret clearance and
I filled out the forms and I as the
forms require I put down all my aliases
I pointed out that I was my name was
Jack O'Brien from the age of 13 to 21
I didn't say Jack O'Brien , the son of
the leading suspect in the hava
disappearance but I did fill out the
forms properly about a week later two or
three FBI agents come to Charlottesville
where I was working at the time I
thought it was this with a standard
security clearance interview I didn't
know what they were
I later found out through a Privacy Act
request that this set off alarm bells
inside of the FBI and they thought that
you know they had access to someone who
was close to the lead suspect from javed
experience and they were gonna learn
something so basically I spent a day
with the FBI and they were basically
grilled me for a day very unexpected to
me I didn't expect this at all and I
thought I was I thought I was finished
in terms of getting a security clearance
about everything I knew about the mob
everything I knew about Chucky my
attitudes towards Chucky and I like well
to make a long story short I convinced
them that I didn't have my values and I
convinced them that I had separated
myself from Chucky and I got the
clearance and that's kind of a metaphor
for the next 20 years of my career I
kept getting the clearance as I got
fancier and fancier government jobs and
I did so basically because I tossed
Chucky under the bus it was as from a
career perspective it was it was a good
move in terms of professional
development so I'm skipping over a lot
of things because I want to get to do
the writing of this book and what it's
about it's about what I'm telling you
now is how the book opens so
fast-forward 1518 years later I'm
working in the Justice Department
I'm the assistant attorney general for
the Office of Legal Counsel a job I
never would have had that it never would
have gotten had I not done what I did to
Chucky 20 years earlier and I'm working
in the Justice Department late one night
and I'm working on a program called
stellar wind which you may have heard of
it's the warrantless wiretapping program
in the Bush administration and to make
another long story short there are all
sorts of problems in the program and I
was just starting to figure it out and I
was in the Justice Department late one
night reading Fourth Amendment cases and
I'm reading a case called Berger versus
New York which some of you may remember
and I'm reading along and there are two
citations Hoffa versus United States
O'Brien versus United States I was kind
of shocked they said can that possibly
be my stepfather I looked up the case it
turned out it was a case involving
Chuckie O'Brien when I was in high
school Chucky had always said how
corrupt the government was they could
break every rule in secret they engage
in legal survey
all the time and they did it to me and I
had a famous Supreme Court case he told
me I didn't believe him and I never knew
about this case it turned out that was
mostly true and it turned out he was
illegally surveilled in the early 1960s
and it turned out this case did vacate
the conviction as part of basically
cleaning up decades of surveillance
abused by the government that finally
emerged in the public in the mid-60s and
he was the beneficiary of this because
the government actually was illegally
surveilling him and his lawyer in the
office of a mob person that he was close
to so this was shocking to me for many
reasons first of all I was in this very
stressful situation involving the
president United States and warrantless
surveillance the war on terrorism
traumatic and another traumatic period
of my life comes back and it just came
rushing back to me that things that
Chuckie said about the Justice
Department and how they could cut
corners and the like and there I was
knee-deep in a surveillance program that
had serious legal problems and some
Chucky basically in the large was right
about the 60s and it was still true in
the large when I was there in the early
2000s so this began a process for me
that took about a year the process in
which I went through a lot of
soul-searching about my relationship
with Chuckie and it involved a lot of
things it involved me realizing that I
had judged him very harshly and that I
had not paid sufficient I had
exaggerated my own virtue and under and
under appreciated his virtues that he
had never done anything wrong to me and
he'd only been a great father to me
when I was in high school he was ill and
I appreciated his situation of being
charged with something bad that he
couldn't really fight because I was
actually when I left the government I
was accused of doing things which I
didn't think were were fair and but I
couldn't really fight those charges
either so I sympathized with him on that
front
and finally I had two young children and
my mom had always told me how badly I
hurt Chuckie when I broke with him but I
didn't really appreciate it until I had
my own children and when I began to
reflect on that the vulnerability and
the love I have for my children in the
pain that what happened to me if I did -
they did to me what I had done to
Chuckie all these reasons came together
to lead me to ask for his forgiveness in
late 2004 it happened in a very casual
way I was we were sitting watching
Seinfeld and in the television room he
wasn't well he was sitting in his chair
and I turned to him and I said I was
wrong to do what I did to you 20 years
ago I hope you'll forgive me and he
looked at me and he was surprised could
we this is the first this is the first
trip that I'd seen him really the amount
of time we had had a good couple of days
together it was like the good old days
but he was shocked when I said this and
he looked at me and his face was ashen
and his eyes were hollow and he started
to tear up and he said you don't have to
apologize son I understand why you did
what you did and that was it that was
the end of any discussion of what had
happened in the previous 20 years he
forgave me
he let me back in his life we became
very close we spent a lot of time
talking of over the next seven years
excuse me
and over the course of these
conversations I started to doubt whether
he was the person who picked up Jimmy
Hoffa for a whole bunch of reasons I
didn't have any evidence and I didn't
know anything about the case but just
the way he talked about it in the way he
revered Hoffa and so I said to him one
day about seven eight years ago I said
why don't I write a book about this I
said I'm sure whatever I find whatever I
discover about what happened in the half
a case that it's got to give you a fair
shake than you've been given because
every book that had been written had had
him driving Hoffa to his death that's
the conventional wisdom and so I he
hesitated he hesitated at first I
thought he would jump at this
to have me write a book book about his
life with Hoffa and a book that tried to
vindicate him from the charge that he
drove hapa to his death and let me just
say he was like this with Hoffa Hoffa
was a father figure to him so he was
basically being charged with patricide
and it was just terrible it and this
charge that was floated in the 70s and
his conventional wisdom everywhere is
ruined his life for a whole bunch of
reasons it did dishonored him it ruined
his life in the Teamsters Union and it
just basically destroyed him
and he tried to fight back and he could
never fight back he didn't have the
rhetorical or financial or legal tools
to even confront these charges so I told
him I would do my best to try he finally
came around and said okay
I said just one condition I'll write
this book I'll do my best I'll try to
clear you I try to figure out what
happened and I'll write the best book I
can but I do this on one condition you
have to tell me the truth he looked at
me with his eyes askance this was a
major challenge because Chucky I learned
when I read what something called The
Hoff X remember I didn't need to read
The Hoff X memorandum The Hoff X
memorandum was too early FBI report
about the case and it referred to Chuck
E as all of his friends say he's a
notorious pathological liar I didn't
need to
I knew this he always shaded the truth
about everything so that's one set of
challenges at my my main witness that
I'm trying to clear as an unreliable
another challenge was there's so much
misinformation built up about the javed
experience over the years mostly based
on the early 1970s theories so many
claims and counterclaims that sifting
through that to try to get to the truth
it was extremely difficult spent seven
years doing it talk to every FBI agent
who ever worked the case it was alive
became friends with many of them I
looked at thousands of pages of
government documents many of which have
never been discussed in in public about
the case
and and Chuckie and I developed a
rapport we spent probably thousands of
hours more than a thousand certainly
talking about the case and it was this
amazing dance where I was the the
interrogator and he would sometimes
answer me straight sometimes not answer
usually try to deflect but over time he
told me quite a lot not everything but
quite a lot to make a long story short I
in the book I do believe that I
accomplished my original goal I thought
was my original goal of clearing him
from the charge that he was the person
who drove off it to his death I think
everyone has read the book you I hope
you agree if you read it has agreed with
that conclusion there are lots of
reasons I won't go through them the
circumstantial case against him is full
of holes there was lots of evidence that
the government didn't talk about or
didn't know about early in the case that
developed to suggest he didn't or
couldn't have done it the most salient
piece of evidence for me was that the
FBI starting in the 1990s believed that
Chucky was not the person who drove
father to his death this is not known in
public and they had all sorts of good
reasons for that and I talked about this
in the book and why they came to the
conclusion that Chucky was not involved
in part because they developed an
alternate theory of the case the case as
it's known in the public today is much
different from the case that the
government understands today all this
has talked about in the book so the book
is in part about my journey kind of a
journey of atonement to try to clear
Chucky along the way and I think I
succeed in that but along the way
fortunately or unfortunately it turned
into something much more than that it
turned into a narrative about the rise
of labor in the 20th century which was
which Hoffa represented and the decline
of labor which he also represented the
rise of the mob in the 20th century and
the decline of the mob which was closely
connected to hafez rise and fall and the
things and the steps that the government
took to both
diminished labor and to try to diminish
the mob and it's a fascinating story it
has really hasn't been adequately told
in my opinion I'd do my best to tell it
along the way I also learned a lot about
law enforcement and the FBI as I say
became very close with some of the early
FBI agents the four original FBI agents
on the Hoffa case who are in their early
30s
the man who originally accused Chucky's
of doing this we became friends we spent
12 sessions together hours and hours and
hours and hours and hours talking about
the case going over the evidence they'd
never stopped obsessing about it no one
who's ever worked about this case has
ever stopped obsessing about it
I don't think dan has stopped obsessing
about it none of the FBI agents have
stopped assessing about it they still
talk about it try to think about it
they're still involved in trying to
solve the mystery but I also learned
about pretty extraordinary law
enforcement abuses and the government
did not treat Chucky well Chucky was a
man who it was not an angel he was
definitely not an angel and there were
good reasons as I say for the government
to suspect him but it turns out that the
public narrative that the government
leaked on Chucky didn't match up at all
with what the government knew inside
they were constantly exaggerating in the
press through leaks the evidence they
had against him to try to get him to
talk they were constantly portraying him
as the person who did it to try to get
him to talk to try to pressuring him
into talking in the hopes either that he
would be feel pressure by that or he
would feel pressure by the mob they were
constantly telling him the mob was gonna
come after him if he didn't that's up
after the government figured out that he
wasn't the person who did it the
government they never corrected the
record there's a mechanism for leaking
allegations and putting it out there and
for 45 44 years he's been accused in the
public eye of this thing there was a
mechanism for that there's no mechanism
for putting that genie back in the
bottle
and it's just not it there's no
incentive in it for the government to do
that once it's out there there's every
incentive for them not to
and then most extraordinarily in 2013
the government approached Chucky I
approached them they approached Chucky
and they offered to actually send him on
exonerating letter to confirm that they
didn't believe he was a target or a
suspect in the case all he had to do
they said is to come in for an interview
tell the truth and he would get this
letter Chucky was a very old man we went
to Detroit went to the interview in the
US Attorney's Office he spent four hours
with them it was actually a hilarious
interview he had everybody in stitches
he told the truth about everything and
they agreed that he told the truth about
everything and they promised the letter
and two or three weeks later they said
the letter was coming and then it was a
month and then it was two months and
four months and six months and then the
letter never came and the letter never
came because the political people at the
top the US attorney and head of the FBI
all the people who worked the case for
decades the assistant US attorney the
FBI agents in charge of the case for
decades were convinced for a whole bunch
of reasons that I talked about in the
book that he didn't do it but they
didn't give him the letter they reneged
so and I tell the story of that and it's
a story poor Chucky of every turn I mean
he's had bad luck most of his life the
book also has to said in the
introduction it's also a history because
this intersected very much with Havas
life in my life it's a history of the
American surveillance state I spend a
lot of time going through these
extraordinary illegal transcripts of
recordings of illegal bugs in the early
1960s and late 1950s of the mob and it's
a story that's from a familiar story
it's a story of the FBI engaging in
illegal bugging with what Chucky
referred to as back up ie the Justice
Department wrote memoranda in secret
saying it's okay familiar story and they
were extremely unconvincing opinions
they were terrible
but this practice went on for decades
and it reached its height in the early
60s it finally leaked out there was
reform I tell the story of that but most
extraordinarily that story of that round
of government access and surveillance
tied up and
lots of ways that I don't have time to
tell you with my experience in the
government with stellar wind and three
or four different ways there was a
connection between what Hoffa went
through and what I what I was doing in
the government fifty years later finally
just a couple more things about the book
the book has many themes I just talked
about two more two more of them and I'll
stop one is there are lots of historical
ironies that I talk about the book as I
said is about the mob and and labor and
their relationship over the course of
the 20th century and there are lots of
interesting historical ironies that took
place Bobby Kennedy who went after half
of very very aggressively crossing
several lines in my opinion and in the
opinion of many he thought that he was
gonna get rid of Hoffa and save the
American labor movement and to save the
Teamsters members from this horrible
person at the top of the Union I can
assure you that the members of the
Teamsters Union who were doing great
under Hoffa trusted the working-class
Hoffa much more than the the preppy
millionaire who was Chucky said never
did a real day's work in his life but
the irony was that in his super
aggressive attacks on Hoffa
he painted bobby painted with a hugely
broad brush I'm talking about the
McClellan committee for those of you
know about it he paint with a broad
brush that stained all of Labor and the
meme about labor corruption really got
going in the late 50s and 60s you can
see it dropping in public approval of
unions over the time that Kennedy was
going after Hoffa that's one historical
irony another historical irony as
Kennedy was convinced Bobby Kennedy was
convinced if he can get rid of Hoffa
decapitate Hoffler from the top of the
Teamsters Union that will get rid of the
mob influence in the Teamsters Union
exactly the opposite happened Hoffa did
dealings with the mob but he also kept
them at bay he was in charge and
especially with regard to the pension
fund when he went away his very weak
successor Frank since Fitzsimmons let
the mob take over so actually
decapitating Hoffa led to much greater
involve infiltration of the Teamsters
Union
then then it happened before something
that also Kennedy did not expect the
third irony is but the mob had taken
over the Teamsters off of trying to get
it back and it was really the mobs
decision to knock off Jimmy Hoffa in
1975 that finally and I tell this story
as well finally led the government with
some tools Congress had given it in the
late 60s and early 70s to get its act
together and have the resources to act
and and to discover when they they put
massive resources on the Hoffa case and
in the course of that these amazing
memos in internal Justice Department
memos when they talked about my god
we've uncovered labor racketeering and
mob connections in between the mob and
the Teamsters as if the McClellan
committee never existed it's much much
worse than we realized
and this is the time starting with the
Hoffa disappearance that allowed the
government to get together the resources
and the tools to really aggressively go
after labor racketeering and fairly
successfully wouldn't say wipe it out
but diminish it significantly and so the
mob miscalculated is I quote one of the
FBI agents in the case if Jimmy Hoffa
were still on the street there would be
a lot more mobsters still on the street
finally and briefly I'll just say that
the book is about and this is the
hardest topic to summarize so I'll just
close here it's about fathers and sons
and treachery between fathers and sons
sons and bothers loyalty and forgiveness
Jimmy Hoffa lost his father when he was
seven years old his father died
Chucky's lost his father when he was
seven years old his dad took off and
because he had trouble with the mob in
Kansas City my father left me when I was
seven years old we were all little boys
in search of stability Hoffa never had a
real father figure he was he did it on
his own
Chucky's father figures were Jimmy Hoffa
and Anthony Giacalone II a senior mob
leader in Detroit who themselves were
very close and Chuckie lived and revered
both men but Jack ellonija was the
person that was behind at least involved
in Havas disappearance and Chucky was
caught in that vise
and to make matters worse of course he
was seen as treacherous because he was
seen as the person who killed his father
essentially or had his father killed
which and then finally about my
relationship with Chucky in the book is
basically about in addition to
everything else about my changing views
about Chucky over the current stages of
my life and how he looked when I was 20
because of how I looked when I was 20
and my perspectives then and how it
looked differently after I've been
through the incredible fire of my job in
the Justice Department and then how it
looked even more different after ten or
twelve years more talking to him as he
got very old and near death and I'm
getting pretty old too and the book is a
reflection on that and some of the
complications in our relationship but
really in the end about how all of this
brought us much much closer than we've
ever been before so that's what the
books about it's about lots of things
and I'm very happy to take your
questions I really enjoyed your book
thank you my question is you talked a
lot about how Chucky had I forgot the
name of it he had had this idea that not
talking about everything Marisa I'm NotI
yeah do you think if he would have told
everything he knew that he would have
gotten that letter I think it was some
Barbara Birk aid Equator no oh good so
just to be clear he answered every
single question that the government
asked him they were asking him questions
about his involvement in the
disappearance they wanted to clear him
because they hoped if they cleared him
this was their theory to me and to him
that he would cooperate in telling them
what he knew about the disappearance of
other things he knew so he told them he
answered all their questions completely
fully and he satisfied every condition
that they had every question that he
asked I don't I mean he told me a lot of
things later they didn't ask him these
questions they didn't ask him what he
knew about all these other collateral
things because there's no way he's gonna
answer that until he gets off the legal
jeopardy hook or true is on a big part
of the book I didn't mention this Chucky
is half Sicilian half Irish but he was
raised with what he calls Sicilian
values he came his mother came from
Kansas City crime family and his mother
schooled him on America the code of
silence Uncle Tony Giacalone II schooled
him on the code of silence and he this
was the most important principle in his
life and it kept beating up against his
desire to help me write this truthful
book that he knew I needed to write and
a lot of the book is about our struggle
to work through his commitment to
America and my commitment to figuring
out everything he knew and it was a
struggle right to the very end as I
talked about in the book first thank you
for being here and putting the stuff
about fathers and sons in the book which
didn't have to be in there you could
have told the story without it it's
really a mostly a great thing thank you
I have one quick question and one longer
question quick question you live in
Arkansas when your mom met Chuckie
O'Brien and how did that happen yeah and
then second part is I paint houses I
think the name of the book is where the
the guy who's you didn't write it but he
told you reporter says it basically he
was the one who killed Hoffa yep and
what do you think you think he's big
he's dead now but do you think that was
truthful or no so I'll answer those two
questions but I want to comment on the
first thing you said yeah so the book is
about fathers and sons and it's really
about about a lot of things about
fathers and sons but it's also about
forgiveness and the power of forgiveness
and I didn't realize what an important
theme this was I just wrote the book I
thought was important about my
relationship with Chuckie and what I
learned about that but the main command
made feedback I've gotten from dozens
now of men all men was thank you for
writing this book because it made me
realize issues I have in my family with
my parents and the importance of
forgiveness in those relationships and
so I'm just that's the most surprising
reaction to the book is that people
appreciated that and were helped by it
on your questions about West Memphis so
my Chuckie was living in Detroit and my
mom was actually living in Florida but
with with she has three boys I was the
oldest but my grandmother lived in West
Memphis that's where I was raised
so we happened to be there that summer
she had met Chucky through Chucky's
mother who was a very consequential
woman amazing woman in labor and mob
circles and so basically Chucky was in
Detroit Brenda was in West Memphis my
mom they got married and then they moved
to Florida as for the book there's the
movie coming out by Martin Scorsese
about Hoffa called the Irishman which is
based on a book called I heard you paint
houses and the book is based on a
confession of Frank Sheeran who was a
Teamsters official and a hit man or at
least criminal serious criminal and
Sheeran gave a confession that turned
into the basis of this book has now been
made into a motion picture and the
confession is to use a technical term
rubbish I've written a long essay in the
New York Review of Books and there's
more to say about it but there's
absolutely zero evidence to support it
no evidence at all to support the
confession and lots of reasons to think
it's false every person I talked to in
the FBI gave me lots of good reasons why
there was no way sure and did it but
it's a very cleverly written book and
now it's the basis for a motion picture
so and most importantly for me so that
the book is basically based on the early
1970s theory of the case that everyone
knows about and writes on and he has
Chucky Drive I mean I haven't read the
seen the movie yet but in the book he
has Chucky picking up Hoffa because
that's what the conventional wisdom was
he Justin surfs himself into that so I
fear I'm sure the movie I suspect that
the movie has Chucky driving him to his
death and I suspect that the Scorsese
movie is going to be more influential
than my account of what the FBI now
thinks and the reasons for it which is
unfortunate I can't help but wonder how
this grenade landed in the middle of
your family of the Hoffa events affected
the other members like your brothers and
your mother
thank you so my brothers and I were very
young and I was 12 my brothers were
seven
and I was told my brothers were eight
and five they were very young and it was
traumatic for all of us and we all dealt
with it in different ways but the person
who was most devastated by it was my mom
she had mental health problems before
this event and they got significantly
worse as a result of the investigation
the publicity the charges the constant
reporters the stress being called before
a grant the grand jury which she
actually didn't have to attend because
of her mental health problems had a
devastating effect on her as for me this
has seemed strange and implausible it
was a wild time but the main thing I
remember about those five years
this is seems impossible was happiness
because of my relationship with Chucky
we were extremely close and I had a
pretty good experience in high school he
with all my sports events we did
everything together I don't remember it
I'm sure I've suppressed a lot I don't
remember it as a terrible time in my
life I remember it has an improvement
time in my life and as a stable and
happy time in my life it was not good
for my mom that was terrible for her I
thank you for your interesting stories
thank you
it's a small point I guess but I was
wondering how is it that Chucky was able
to get information about the information
that turned out to be truthful about the
government surveillance of himself and
of others yeah he's something you were
skeptical of it's one point in your life
and then came to realize was true right
but you had inside information to learn
that it was true he didn't no no that's
that's not accurate I'm sorry if I
misled you so there was starting the
late 50s when Hoover dagger Hoover the
FBI director finally became advant
convinced for a whole bunch of reasons
in the late 50s that he had to take
organized crime seriously his first line
of attack was to use mostly bugs
sometimes wire surveillance to gather
Intel
on mom figures and this started in the
late 50s and it went through 1965 or so
it was not known at the time it was
secret but it all came out in the 60s
and indeed the reason Chucky knew about
it is because the government disclosed
when the government revealed all this
illegal activity the Supreme Court
ordered them basically to say well what
are you gonna do
it had its they had to confess error to
the court Thurgood Marshall is the
Solicitor General they confessed error
to the court they said what they thought
the legal basis was they said they'd
stop doing these things they presented a
plan to the court in which they pledged
to the court that they would reveal
every case in which there was even close
to illegal surveillance and confessed
error about that
Chucky's case was one of those he got
lucky because of this of these leaks
about this in the 60s so he learned
about it in the 60s and that was the
basis for his for this his conviction
being vacated more generally I mean one
of the many things I learned in writing
this book was now we live in an era of
surveillance paranoia and there's every
reason to be paranoid not just because
of what the government is doing but
mostly just because everybody's watching
all the time there are sensors on
everything there was dramatic paranoia
in the early 60s there were story after
story after story about the newfangled
recording devices that were around every
corner and that were watching us and
storing the data it sounds very much
like what we talked about today and
Hoffa had lots of reasons to think that
he was being surveilled the government
was very aggressively following him he
believed he was being illegally
wiretapped he was never able to prove it
but the short answer to your question is
the illegal surveillance came out in the
60s Chucky learned about it then he
didn't learn about the extent of it the
reason I know about the extent of it is
because this is a long story and I'll
make short all of these transcripts from
all of these almost a lot of these
illegal recordings and early 60s are
available in public now as part of
Believe It or Not the 1980s
investigation into the assassination of
John F Kennedy and they collected all
sorts of evidence about the government
in the mob and the course of doing that
these documents ended up being in the
public record that's how I got access to
all of these documents but Chucky
learned about it in the 60s thank you
yeah I can still remember watching
senator McClellan and Bobby Kennedy as
an extremely tiny person do you have any
sense or general comment you'd like to
say about whether the Teamsters are a
force for good or ill in the history of
the country today or in history of the
country so I'll talk I can talk more
about the 50s and 60s and 40s and 70s
then again about today that's the period
I studied for the book and talked about
and it's it's a story of tragedy I think
so it's hard to exaggerate how powerful
the Teamsters Union was in the 50s and
60s and they were powerful because Hoffa
basically expanded the bargaining unit
to the national level and that meant
that he could by closing down
transportation routes from failing to
deliver or failing deliveries to happen
at crucial strategic points he could put
economic leverage on anyone and this is
before and the government tried to clamp
down on this through labor laws but
basically the teachers had extraordinary
power Hoffa was extremely successful in
in growing the power of the Teamsters
extremely successful at bringing many
hundreds of thousands of workers many
hundreds of thousands out of poverty and
into the middle class he was just very
successful at bringing home the bacon
for his Union and considered narrowly he
was good for labor in terms of being
good for the Teamsters at least in that
short period of time ultimately however
and there was this promise I mean I
don't think it was ever a serious
promise but Hoffa was on the outs with
all the rest of Labor for a whole bunch
of reasons in part because of his
commitments he thought that they were
captured by various interest but in part
because he was corrupt and you know in a
counterfactual world Hoffa might have
led the if alpha-1 didn't if had this
conventional corruption in a
counterfactual world he could have led
labor in a very different direction
ultimately he ended up doing great
damage to the labor movement even though
he because basically his performance at
the McClellan committee
was one of basically indifference to the
corruption and criminality around him
and his indifference to those things
really just had it had an effect far
beyond the Teamsters in terms of touring
the whole labor movement so it's hard to
make very sweeping generalities but I
think on the whole Hoffa though a
brilliant and very effective labor
leader on the whole I think his impact
has to be seen as negative on balance
well Dave Beck was his predecessor and
he was they both Beck Beck was his
president the predecessors to Hoffa in
the teachers union and he and Beck had
similar tactics he wasn't as gray wasn't
he used these similar similar bargaining
techniques that Hoffa perfected he
wasn't the charismatic leader Hoffa was
and he had different kinds of corruption
Hoffa's corruption I'll just say how I
was always making side deals and always
amassing cash according to Chucky tens
of millions of dollars there was just
cash everywhere and I believed it for it
was confirmed by a whole lot of things I
found in my research but Hoffa wasn't
spending it on himself and he didn't
have a fancy life he was spending it to
enhance his power to buy people off to
buy politicians off to buy judge's off
to buy off anyone who had helped him and
he identified his power with Teamsters
power and that was more or less true not
completely back was was more
conventionally corrupt in terms of
lining his pockets for his benefit yes
I haven't read all of your book just a
portion of a nice scan some of it but
you have said that while Chuckie didn't
get the letter to exonerate him you said
the FBI did know who did it and who do
they say so I do not so over the course
of many spending a lot of time with
people with government officials in
Detroit I kind of triangulated and
figured out what their current theory is
and their current theory of the case for
which which is based on
surveillance evidence conversations that
they overheard and informant evidence is
that the they think that no did it they
think that Vito jackal Oni who was the
son to the brother of Anthony jackal Oni
who was my uncle Tony was the person who
actually picked off up and they have
reason to think that and they think that
I'm not going to mention the name for
reasons I'll explain in a second they
think they know the person was who
actually killed Hoffa they caught him on
tape bragging about it in a way that was
corroborated with some other pieces of
information that they had this
corroboration was the basis for the 2013
dig for the last of a dozen dings to
look for Hoffa so they think they know
the two to two people that and this
person who was a very low-level member
of the Detroit crime family quickly rose
and promised in the Detroit ranks I
didn't mention his name in the book
because for a couple of reasons and I'm
not sure where I should have drawn the
line I didn't mention his name in the
book because I don't know what the FBI's
evidence is the FBI's had many theories
over the years and they seem very
confident about this theory I mentioned
Vito because he's been conventionally
mentioned as a suspect my publisher
wanted me to mention the other name but
I didn't because I found it very
frustrating that Chuckie was just
mentioned as a suspect based on what the
FBI thought and that turned out not to
be true and this gentleman is dead he
died but I just thought that I shouldn't
do what I didn't appreciate others doing
to Chucky so I didn't mention his name
in the book but they do think they know
I believe based on conversations with
people in Detroit and the government
that they are going to release this
information at some point in the near
future thank you I'm a victim of
starting with denimm all day and years
and Steve Brill and everybody else at
the end of the book I love the book and
I think everybody should read it thank
you your stepfather does tip his hand a
bit and indicate that Tony Provenzano
was likely involved in it right is it
appropriate to ask you how you think it
connects up to the New Jersey
mom well so Chucky tried hard not to
tell me things he wasn't supposed to
tell me but he did tell me some things
that he wasn't supposed to tell me and
one of the things he told me was that
Tony Provenzano who was teachers
official in the New Jersey Teamsters and
a member of the tenor of a Z family I
think was as has been widely suspected
since 1975 involved in the in the
organization of the plot and he didn't
give any details but he told me this in
an extremely credible way that it was
corroborated by a few things and again
it's not surprising that Tony Pro Uncle
Tony when I was growing up that it's not
surprising that Uncle Tony was involved
it but Chucky's corroboration I think is
an important point it seems pretty clear
to me based on what I learned from
Chucky what I've learned from others
that the hava hit was approved by the
Commission the New York Commission in
New York this was a decision that
affected the whole nation everybody
because Hoffa was threatening to take
everyone down and there were gonna be
consequences for everyone
so as the decision made there Tony Pro
for a variety of reasons was on the outs
with Hoffa and I think he was basically
the intermediary between the Commission
and this is my speculation Chucky didn't
tell me this but it's informed
speculation and Detroit especially
Anthony Giacalone II there's a lot of
metadata information which hasn't been
fully explored in public showing
communications between Jacqueline E and
Provenzano
which look very much like because of the
the intensity and the dates and some of
their other calls they made looks very
much like Pro was working with
Jacqueline E so that's that's the basic
contours of the conspiracy at the 40,000
foot level does that answer your
question yeah any other questions
professor Goldsmith thank you for coming
and thank you for this wonderful book
and to follow on the last question I
have just one question remaining after
reading your book carefully what ever
happened to Tony Provenzano spool table
that's a great question
so Tony Provenzano pool-table uncle Tony
Tony Provenzano was as Chucky said in
the book the most uncontrollably violent
man I met in my life
and he had some other descriptions as
well and Provenzano
was but that's not the Tony Pro I knew
the turning pro I knew and I was growing
up was this kind gentleman who was
always in a bathing suit in his
Hallandale home where we would often go
to hang out of the pool and have
barbecues and play on his gorgeous pool
table he had this gorgeous wooden pool
table and I was 13 or 14 then I was
really into pool and I loved that pool
table and I asked him where he got it
and where I could get one and one day
Tony uncle Tony called up Chucky and
said come over here and get this goddamn
pool table and give it to your children
what's Chucky did and we had this
beautiful Tony Pro pool table in our
garage and Jacaranda in Plantation which
I adore throughout my high school years
and I don't know what happened to the
pool table I have to say if I had
understood the significance of the pool
table when I was 17 I would give
anything to have that pool table now but
I don't know what happened to it I think
about Tony Pryor every time I play pool
anybody else let me echo everyone else's
comments absolutely amazing book the
question I had kind of goes to the the
conversation you had with Chucky I think
it was Applebee's or one of those kind
of seasons 52 seasons 52 where he you
know reveals a lot more than he's
supposed to but it sounded unlike most
other conversations you had with him he
tried to retract a lot of that yeah and
so toward the end of the book you talked
a little bit about sort of your internal
struggle about how much of that to
publish yes and I guess bull will never
know exactly how much of that you did
publish because we don't know what you
didn't publish but I guess the question
is you know kind of talk through you
know that because it felt in the book a
little bit inconclusive where you sort
of laid out the case for both sides but
then never really resolved it one way or
another kind of like a lawyer yeah
exactly which I which I am so let me
accept that let me explain what
was just asked for it so everyone can
understand so I learned a lot from
Chucky over our many many many hundreds
of hours of conversation and even when
he as I say he was always torn he always
had his mother's visit in his in the
back of his head every time he got close
to telling me something he said my mom's
looking at me I can't say that and but
he wanted to tell me things and but he
kept holding back and I wasn't I really
wasn't
I didn't push him because I actually
came to respect hisk I mean it seems a
bizarre but I came to admire this
important principle for him because it
was basically all he had left at the end
of his life and he'd lost everything
else but he still told me a lot even
while not said of confessing everything
and then one day my mom had had a heart
attack and I came down to see her in
Boca ratone and Chucky was there in the
hospital and he was in much worse shape
than my mom my mom was gonna do okay but
Chucky was distraught about her so my
mom said take him to lunch at seasons 52
and the food will calm him down this is
a point in my conversations to Chuck you
and had basically decided I wasn't gonna
press him anymore he told me what he was
gonna tell me and I was gonna write the
book we sit down at seasons 52 and I
just reflexively hit the voice the
recorder on my iPhone because in all of
our conversations I just always have the
recorder I had no expectation of having
any conversation and I didn't even I
just did it without even thinking and so
we were talking along and we weren't
even talk we were talking about my
childhood and the good old days when I
was Jack O'Brien and the fun things we
did and then somehow the our trip to
Detroit the previous year for this
interview of the government came up and
I just said without even just just to be
talking I said you know those guys think
that Tony Pro was involved and I know
you don't think that but they think
they're pretty clear that he and and
Anthony were involved and Chuck he said
Tony Pro had a lot to do with it and I
was stunned I was stunned
he never ever had talked about he's had
it in a way that was very credible and
he had never talked about Tony Bros
involved in the disappearance and he'd
always giving me these stories which I
didn't believe about how he wasn't
involved and he looked down in his soup
and he proceeded for about 40 minutes to
tell me a whole bunch of things and I
learned a lot in that conversation and a
lot of what's new in the book about the
Hoffa disappearance I learned in that
conversation and it was when I realized
a lot of things it was in that
conversation that I realized that Chucky
and I didn't explain this but the moment
Hoffa disappeared Chucky was in this
vise he was not involved but he knew a
lot about the backdrop he knew a lot
about the Teamsters relationships with
the mob he knew all the players involved
he immediately knew what happened and
why and so when all this pressure from
the government was coming down on him
the government the mob was worried that
Chucky was gonna break and flip so he
had to be very careful about what he
said he had to get permission for every
time he talked to the government I came
to understand the incredible pressure he
was under but he also told me a lot
about the background not to what
happened that afternoon I don't believe
he knows what happened that afternoon I
don't believe they told him he told me
they didn't tell him and he said he's
glad he did they didn't tell him and he
said he doesn't know want to know what
happened but he told me a lot of things
that he and one of the many reasons that
I I found it credible that day and I
came to find it credible because he
immediately regretted telling me what he
told me I didn't even he told me this
because he was distraught and he was I
don't know why he told me he was
distraught about my mom and he was
distraught and he was exhausted and he
just downloaded and I at that point this
was a very important point in writing
the book at that point I had a huge
dilemma from and the dilemma was wow I
just learned a lot of things they go to
the truth of a lot of things about the
Hoffa disappearance that is not known
and it's credible and I can't write this
book if I can't include this information
that's just crystal clear to me on the
other hand but then Chucky a couple of
weeks later I had a basically a meltdown
and said you can't put that stuff in the
book and it wasn't because he feared for
his life it became clear it because he
would violate his honor he told me
something he was
supposed to and he made this very clear
to me and I struggled and struggled with
what to do and my plan was because I
basically said to my publisher I should
either not write the book I can't write
the book without this information or I
can wait until Jackie passes away and
that was my plan I was gonna because and
yet I wanted to exonerate him or show
the world that he didn't do this
terrible thing but I didn't want to stay
in his honor in the process so but
that's my my the way I had done it was I
wasn't gonna publish the book until he
passed away well because of this
Scorsese movie Chucky was very anxious
for me to publish the book because he
wanted the world to know that he didn't
in fact drive Hoffa to his death despite
this movie and he was putting a lot of
pressure on me to publish it and so I
decided time was running short I said
okay I'm gonna let him decide and I
showed him the manuscript which included
these things he told me not every single
detail but much of what he told me which
I found to be material and I was gonna
let him decide let him make the
trade-off about what he valued most
I go down to Boca Raton Florida I gave
him the manuscript on a Monday I said I
needed it back by Friday my publisher
has to know that day whether we're going
forward over the course of that tense
week I was sure he was gonna say you
can't publish this I saw him looking at
the manuscript he was wincing a few
times he asked me to take a few things
out completely non material things but
just the stupidest little things please
take that out of respect for Barbara
Hoffa or whatever but the meat of the
things he told me that he might regret
was at the end of the book and I saw I'm
flipping through to the end of course
and seeing what happened Friday comes
round and I say I have to know
you want me to publish the book or not
your call and he handed me the
manuscript with a terribly sad face and
he said I read every word he wrote a
great book congratulations son
and I thought what the hell does that
mean because I don't think he read the
book I don't think he read to the end
and I don't know why I don't know if it
was because it was too painful
I don't know if it's cuz he didn't want
the responsibility for it
I don't know if he decided to suck up
his honor so that I could publish this
book which I thought was important or I
don't know if he decided clearing my
name is more important than this but he
gave me the thumbs up and I reflect in
the end of the book in a way that I
can't really reproduce here but I
reflected the end of the book about was
I thinking about Chucky without thinking
about me what was the right call did I
do the right thing and it was a very
very very tough decision I can report
now that he is not well he's near the
end of his life I fear but he is very
pleased with the book he he struggled
with it in various ways I was it's a
very candid book and I'm talking about
my warts and his and lots of other
people's as I say I tried to write an
honest book but the week it was
published he he had basically not talked
to me about it I was very concerning to
me because I wrote the book for him and
I feared if he hated it that I failed
and basically he called me a couple of
days after the book was probably I'd
given him a copy of the book a couple of
weeks earlier and he was in tears and
which he doesn't often do and he
basically said I've read the book three
times I really read it this time you
wrote an amazing book I don't know how
you did it I don't know how you figured
all that stuff out you got it exactly
right I'm terribly sorry I was such a
pain in the ass and that for me made it
worth writing the book because I really
do think but I cleared his name from
this it was a very difficult call about
what to put in I still don't know if I
made the right call but that judgment by
him for me made it all okay thank you
very very much
[Applause]
you